docs: update lint.md (#665)
Redocly/openapi-cli: docs/commands/lint.md

# `lint`

> ## Why you need it

Reviewer: issue: Changing this heading will make this page inconsistent with all the other pages for commands. Currently, they all follow the same structure: Introduction - Usage - Options - Examples. I believe we want to keep this "predictability" in the way they're internally organized. Do you plan to make this same change on all other command pages?

Author: I'll reinstate the current format. Due to my part-time nature, it might take months to sort all of the command pages out so I agree to keep the status quo.

> One of the most powerful features of Redocly OpenAPI CLI is its ability to identify problems found in OpenAPI definition files. This is achieved through the `lint` command, which helps your definitions conform to a consistent set of rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the most powerful features of Redocly OpenAPI CLI is the ability to identify problems found in OpenAPI definition files. This is achieved with the `lint` command, which helps your definitions conform to a consistent set of rules.
```

> The `lint` command ensures that your definition file structure is valid (according to the OpenAPI Specification and your own custom rules, if any) and contains no errors. It also executes preprocessors and rules (unlike the `bundle` command, `lint` doesn't execute decorators). To learn more about preprocessors and rules, see the [custom rules](../resources/custom-rules.md) page.

Reviewer: suggestion: I would keep the information about not executing decorators more visible - it's an important distinction between those two commands, and if we keep it in parentheses as a sidenote, it's easy to miss.

> Always the over-achiever, `lint` has options which you can execute alone, or combine with others:

Reviewer: issue: We list some of the options here, but not all of them. Why? Also, again - removing the Usage/Options headings makes the page structure inconsistent with other commands pages.

Reviewer: suggestion: Maybe we can drop this `Usage` section and these options altogether, but keep the `Options` section with all supported options listed in one place? That way, we won't have this redundant/incomplete situation where some options are mentioned twice, and some just once. And then we can rename the `Examples` section to `Usage examples`. That structure won't be too drastically different from all the other pages (it's easy to make that change across all pages), and it will still have the effect of cleaning up the page. What do you think?

Author: To answer your question, I don't think the Usage section on the current page is meant to show an example of all commands, just a few, including combos. I will list all of them in the one place in the new page and show single commands as well as combos.

Re your suggestion - will do.

## Introduction

> One of the most powerful features of Redocly CLI is its ability to identify problems found in OpenAPI definitions. This is achieved with the `lint` command, which helps your definitions conform to a consistent set of rules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the most powerful features of Redocly CLI is its ability to lint OpenAPI definitions.
This helps your definitions conform to a consistent API styleguide.
```

> One of the most powerful features of Redocly CLI is its ability to identify problems found in OpenAPI definition files. This is achieved with the `lint` command, which helps your definitions conform to a consistent set of rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the most powerful features of Redocly CLI is its ability to identify problems found in OpenAPI definitions. This is achieved with the `lint` command, which helps your definitions conform to a consistent set of rules.
```

Reviewer: I think we can keep it simple; it's generally understood that those are files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the most powerful features of Redocly CLI is its ability to identify problems found in OpenAPI definitions. This is achieved with the `lint` command, which keeps your API design consistent.
```

> The `lint` command ensures that your definition file structure is valid (according to the OpenAPI Specification and your own custom rules, if any) and contains no errors. It also executes preprocessors and rules.

Reviewer 2: This isn't really correct. 
```suggestion
The `lint` command ensures that your definition file structure is valid (according to the OpenAPI Specification) and adheres to your API styleguide.
```

:::warning Important
Unlike the `bundle` command, `lint` doesn't execute decorators. To learn more about preprocessors and rules, see the [custom rules](../resources/custom-rules.md) page.
:::

## Options

Always the over-achiever, `lint` has many options which you can execute alone, or combine with others in a single command:

> ```bash Alone

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash Standalone
```

Reviewer: suggestion: this might be a more common word in the context of CLI commands

redocly lint
redocly lint <entrypoints>...
redocly lint --config=<path>
redocly lint --extends=<value>
redocly lint --format=<value>
redocly lint --generate-ignore-file
redocly lint --help
redocly lint --max-problems=<n>
redocly lint --skip-preprocessor=<preprocessor>
redocly lint --skip-rule=<rule>,<rule>
redocly lint --version

> ```

Reviewer 2: Is this part necessary? There is a table with options below. And then examples further down below.

Author: I can get rid of it.

```bash Combined
redocly lint [--max-problems=<n>] [--config=<path>] [--format=<value>]
```

> | Option | Type | Description |

Reviewer 2: This matched the actual tool's help before. Now it doesn't.  This is also outdated in some places. I would recommend parity between the command's help and this content. A ticket can be opened to adjust the built in help, but I believe it should be in the standard declarative style all CLI tools I use adhere to.

Author: OK, I'll stick with the original table columns.

|---|---|---|

> | entrypoints | array | Lets you [pass the entrypoints](#how-to-use-entrypoints-to-check-all-or-selected-definitions) (locations) of specific definition files in the command so `lint` only checks those files. |

Reviewer 2: issue with: "only check those files".  Lint will also check any files pointed to by reference object.

Author: Would it be better if we just say...

Lets you pass the entrypoints (locations) of specific definition files in the command.

Reviewer: That suggestion sounds good to me :heavy_plus_sign:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| entrypoints | array | [Sets the entrypoints](#how-to-use-entrypoints-to-check-all-or-selected-definitions) (locations) of specific definition files to lint. If no entrypoints are provided, all the APIs defined in the Redocly configuration file are linted. |
```

> | --config | string | Lets you [specify a path to a custom config file](#how-to-reference-a-custom-config-file). |

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure "Lets you" makes sense in the context of CLI options.

I'm used to a more declarative style:

https://awscli.amazonaws.com/v2/documentation/api/latest/reference/index.html
https://cli.github.com/manual/gh_auth_login
https://curl.se/docs/manpage.html
https://git-scm.com/docs/git-switch

> | --extends | array | [Extends the existing config](#how-to-activate-rule-sets) by invoking rule sets that apply lots of rules at once. Possible values: `minimal`, `recommended`, `all`. Default: `recommended`. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| --extends | array | [Extends the existing configuration](#how-to-activate-rule-sets). |
```

| --format | string | [Applies formatting to the output](#how-to-format-linting-results). Possible values: `codeframe`, `stylish`, `json`, `checkstyle`. Default: `codeframe`. |
| --generate-ignore-file | boolean | [Generates an ignore file](#how-to-ignore-specific-errors-and-warnings) which tells Redocly CLI to ignore certain warnings/errors when validating the definition. |
| --help | boolean | [Displays a short help menu](#how-to-open-the-help), showing lint options. |
| --max-problems | integer | [Truncates the output](#how-to-limit-issues-shown-in-the-output) to show only a specified number of errors and warnings. Default: `100`. |
| --skip-preprocessor | array | [Ignores specific preprocessors](#how-to-skip-a-rule-or-preprocessor-during-linting). |

> | --skip_rule | array | [Ignores specific custom or built-in rules](#how-to-skip-a-rule-or-preprocessor-during-linting). |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| --skip-rule | array | [Ignores specific custom or built-in rules](#how-to-skip-a-rule-or-preprocessor-during-linting). |
```

> | --version | boolean | Adding `--version` to any command (not just `lint`) will show your current Redocly CLI version. |

Reviewer 2: I prefer the original documentation here because this is a page about the lint command and "Show version number" is more to the point.

Author: OK I will reinstate it.

> ## Usage examples

Reviewer: I think this was originally my own suggestion :see_no_evil: but looking at it now, it's simpler to just say "Examples", which is what we do in all the other command docs.

> ## Usage examples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Examples
```

> ### How to use entrypoints to check all or selected definitions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### How to use entrypoints to lint all or selected definitions
```

##### Method 1: Pass entrypoints directly

> In this case, `lint` will validate the definitions passed in the command and ignore the `apis` section in `redocly.yaml` or any other customized config file you may be using.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case, `lint` will validate the definitions passed in the command and ignore the `apis` object in the Redocly configuration file.
```

| --max-problems | integer | [Truncates the output](#how-to-limit-issues-shown-in-the-output) to show only a specified number of errors and warnings. Default: `100`. |
| --skip-preprocessor | array | [Ignores specific preprocessors](#how-to-skip-a-rule-or-preprocessor-during-linting). |
| --skip_rule | array | [Ignores specific custom or built-in rules](#how-to-skip-a-rule-or-preprocessor-during-linting). |
| --version | boolean | Adding `--version` to any command (not just `lint`) will show your current Redocly CLI version. |

### Entrypoints
## Usage examples

The `lint` command behaves differently depending on how you pass entrypoints to it and whether the [configuration file](#custom-configuration-file) exists.
### How to use entrypoints to check all or selected definitions

#### Pass entrypoints directly
##### Method 1: Pass entrypoints directly
In this case, `lint` will validate the definitions passed in the command and ignore the `apis` section in `redocly.yaml` or any other customized config file you may be using.

```bash
openapi lint openapi/openapi.yaml
redocly lint openapi/openapi.yaml
```

> In this case, `lint` will validate the definition(s) passed to the command. The configuration file is ignored.

Reviewer 2: I didn't check if the configuration file is ignored. If it is, this is very important documentation.

Author: Sorry Adam. I don't know what you mean or what action I should take here.

Reviewer 2: We need to check if this sentence is correct. If it is, it needs to be in the docs.

Author: I have several api definition files in my project directory and all are listed in my `redocly.yaml` file under the `apis` object. When I run this command, only the specified definition file is linted, all others are ignored. So I have concluded that this statement is correct.

Reviewer 2: I read this in a different way.

If I have a lint configuration, and I run the lint command on an API using the filename instead of the API name then the lint configurations are ignored and it will use the default lint configuration. I haven't tried to verify what the behavior is though.

Author: I ran the command first using the API name then the filename, and both validated:

```
C:\Users\jodyw\Filing Cabinet\Git\redocly-openapi-starter\openapi>redocly lint production@v1
No configurations were defined in extends -- using built in recommended configuration by default.

validating ./production.yaml...
./production.yaml: validated in 40ms

Woohoo! Your OpenAPI definition is valid. 🎉
```

```
C:\Users\jodyw\Filing Cabinet\Git\redocly-openapi-starter\openapi>redocly lint production.yaml
No configurations were defined in extends -- using built in recommended configuration by default.

validating production.yaml...
production.yaml: validated in 38ms

Woohoo! Your OpenAPI definition is valid. 🎉
```

Should our statement in fact read:

In this case, `lint` will only validate the API definition(s) passed in the command (you can use either the API name or filename). For example:

`redocly lint core@v1`
` redocly lint openapi.yaml`

> The `apis` section in the Redocly configuration file (`redocly.yaml`) lets you configure one or more APIs. Each file path is specified (using the `root` property), but files are identified by their name and version in the format `name@version`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `apis` object in the Redocly configuration file (`redocly.yaml`) lets you configure one or more APIs. Each file path is specified (using the `root` property), but files are identified by their name and version in the format `name@version`.
```

> `@version` is optional, and when not provided, Redocly apps interpret it as `latest` by default. Every `name@version` combination listed in the `apis` section must be unique.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is appropriate for documentation because the version should be supplied. There is a lot of things people can do in an incomplete manner, but we don't call out explicitly that they can do it in an incomplete manner and it will still work (partially).

Author: But what if there are no versions? Are we saying we expect users to always express `name@version` regardless? How would that go for my one version...?

myapi@v1

Reviewer: I think we don't want to encourage users to omit `version` because it can cause compatibility problems with the API registry. I don't know if you've tried this already, but when you're adding an API to the registry, it doesn't let you complete the action unless you specify the `version`. So in the light of that, it makes sense to sort of "steer" them in this happy-path direction where they just always specify the version and don't have to think about what would happen if they didn't have it.

> You can pass `name` or `name@version` in commands like `lint` and `stats` to act only on those APIs. Below is an example `apis` section showing three files identified using `main`, `production` and `sandbox`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can pass `name@version` in commands like `lint` and `stats` to act only on those APIs. Below is an example `apis` object showing three files identified using `core@latest`, `production@v1` and `sandbox@v1`:
```

> ```yaml Configuration file

Reviewer 2: This file goes beyond a minimal viable example. It is also incorrect everywhere:

Wrong
```
lint: []
```

Correct
```
lint: {}
```

One is an array, and one is an object. The same issue with `features.openapi`.

Those shouldn't be fixed though. They should be removed here because it is a configuration of nothing. The minimum way to do the same thing is to remove the lines, making the file shorter and easier to digest.

Author: Sorry Adam. I don't know what you mean or what action I should take here.

>   main:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  core@latest:
```

>       - main

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - core
```

>     labels:
>       - main
>     lint: []
>     features.openapi: []
>   production:
>     root: ./production.yaml
>     labels:
>       - production
>     lint: []
>     features.openapi: []
>   sandbox:
>     root: ./sandbox.yaml
>     labels:
>       - sandbox
>     lint: []
>     features.openapi: []

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  production@v1:
    root: ./production.yaml
  sandbox@v1:
    root: ./sandbox.yaml
```

>  In this example, we only want to validate files under `main`:

Reviewer 2: It's not about "files" (I think this is the wrong word).

Author: How about 'APIs' or 'API definitions' instead of 'files'?

Reviewer: APIs is enough, I think

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 In this example, we only want to validate the `core@latest` API:
```

>  In this example, we only want to validate files under `main`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 In this example, we validate the `core@latest` API:
```

```bash Command

> redocly lint main

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
redocly lint core@latest
```

```

##### Method 3: Pass no entrypoints

> Running `lint` without specifying a particular API definition file checks all definition files in your project directory.

Reviewer: question: doesn't `lint` in this case validate all APIs listed in the conf file? I don't think it cares about the project directory because you could technically have an API definition located entirely outside of the project directory, but still have it listed in the `apis` section of the conf file. Maybe this needs to be tested?

Reviewer 2: You are correct @skadinna.
```suggestion
Running `lint` without specifying a particular API definition checks all APIs in your configuration file.
```

```bash
redocly lint
```

:::warning Important
If you run `redocly lint` without entrypoints, and your project has no configuration files, you'll get an error.

> :::

Reviewer 2: This does not seem important. They will see the error which will tell them:

>  error: missing required argument `entrypoints`.

Do we need to document this?

Author: It can't hurt to leave it in.

### How to reference a custom config file

> By default, Redocly CLI looks for the [Redocly configuration file](/docs/cli/configuration/configuration-file.mdx) in the current working or project directory. Using the optional `--config` argument provides an alternative path to a different configuration file if one exists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Redocly CLI looks for the [Redocly configuration file](/docs/cli/configuration/configuration-file.mdx) in the current working or project directory. With the optional `--config` argument, you can provide the path to a different configuration file.
```

Reviewer: Suggesting this just to simplify the sentence

```bash
redocly lint --config=./another/directory/anotherconfig.yaml
```

> ### How to activate rule sets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### How to activate rule configurations
```

Reviewer: This is my mistake. I think I used this term, _rule sets_, to explain this functionality to you at some point. I also used it in other places in the docs. Later, Adam warned me not to use that term anymore, so I removed it but forgot to tell you. Sorry about that. I think we must use "rule configurations" instead, or just "configuration" when it's clear from the context we're talking about rules.

> Redocly CLI comes with [built-in rules](./resources/built-in-rules.md) that are used to validate API definitions. If you want to override a rule or reduce its severity, you can do so by modifying `redocly.yaml` (globally or per API definition).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Redocly CLI comes with [built-in rules](./resources/built-in-rules.md) that are used to validate API definitions.
```
That sentence feels misplaced. The built-in rules aren't enabled automatically. The user can enable or disable them in their configuration file.

> An alternative approach is to use **rule sets** to quickly invoke a lot of rules at the same time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An alternative approach is to use **rule configurations** to quickly invoke a lot of rules at the same time.
```

> An alternative approach is to use **rule configurations** to quickly invoke a lot of rules at the same time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An alternative approach is to use **rule configurations** to quickly configure a lot of rules at the same time.
```

Author: I used the word 'invoke' here because in this context, isn't the user using `--extends` to trigger pre-configured rule sets?

> Redocly CLI has three rule sets, each specifying different levels of severity, that can be applied to API definition file validation by adding the `--extends` option to the `lint` command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Redocly CLI has three built-in rule configurations, each specifying different levels of severity, that can be used to validate API definitions by adding the `--extends` option to the `lint` command:
```

> * For you rebels out there, the `minimal` rule set will apply the least severe config for each built-in rule, and deactivate others entirely. We like to call this our death-metal rule set. View the GitHub Source [here](https://github.com/Redocly/openapi-cli/blob/ed997e2586e7adb7e32d8107cac79c452891f765/packages/core/src/config/minimal.ts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For you rebels out there, the `minimal` configuration will apply the least severe config for each built-in rule, and deactivate others entirely. We like to call this our death-metal rule set. View the GitHub Source [here](https://github.com/Redocly/openapi-cli/blob/ed997e2586e7adb7e32d8107cac79c452891f765/packages/core/src/config/minimal.ts).
```

> * Late 80s easy-listening more your jam? Then our `recommended` rule set is for you. It will apply the recommended config for each built-in rule. View the GitHub source [here](https://github.com/Redocly/openapi-cli/blob/ed997e2586e7adb7e32d8107cac79c452891f765/packages/core/src/config/recommended.ts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Late 80s easy-listening more your jam? Then our `recommended` configuration is for you. It will apply the recommended config for each built-in rule. View the GitHub source [here](https://github.com/Redocly/openapi-cli/blob/ed997e2586e7adb7e32d8107cac79c452891f765/packages/core/src/config/recommended.ts).
```

> * Got Gregorian chants playing on loop? The `all` rule set will satisfy your need for strictness. All rules are on, and `lint` will return an error if your API definition is anything less than perfect. View the GitHub source [here](https://github.com/Redocly/openapi-cli/blob/e6f99e57da339d89bba7f4a1ba897282d7cebbd2/packages/core/src/config/all.ts).

Reviewer 2: This shouldn't be used.

Author: Do you mean you don't like the jovial language/tone I've used here, or that the entire list should be deleted? If the latter, the explanation of the `--extends` option will lack an overview of its allowed values (rule sets). Can you let me know what action you'd like me to take?

Reviewer: I've no idea what Adam meant exactly, but I'm not a fan of these random musical references at all. They appear out of nowhere, without any precedent on this page. If you had used some kind of a music-related "theme" throughout the text, then it would work just fine. But like this, they're just distracting/fluff.

Reviewer 2: I meant about the `all` word. It doesn't make sense to be used. It's intended for testing purposes.

Author: Just my attempt at some humour... they weren't meant to link to anything else :) Might be best if I keep the tone more even from now on.

> * Got Gregorian chants playing on loop? The `all` rule set will satisfy your need for strictness. All rules are on, and `lint` will return an error if your API definition is anything less than perfect. View the GitHub source [here](https://github.com/Redocly/openapi-cli/blob/e6f99e57da339d89bba7f4a1ba897282d7cebbd2/packages/core/src/config/all.ts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Got Gregorian chants playing on loop? The `all` configuration will satisfy your need for strictness. All rules are on, and `lint` will return an error if your API definition is anything less than perfect. View the GitHub source [here](https://github.com/Redocly/openapi-cli/blob/e6f99e57da339d89bba7f4a1ba897282d7cebbd2/packages/core/src/config/all.ts).
```

> When you compare the source files, you will see that some rules are switched on, some are set to different severities, and some are switched off. Here's how to activate each rule set when linting your API definitions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you compare the source files, you will see that some rules are switched on, some are set to different severities, and some are switched off. Here's how to activate each rule configuration when linting your API definitions:
```

  --skip-rule             Ignore certain rules.                          [array]
  --skip-preprocessor     Ignore certain preprocessors.                  [array]
  --config                Specify path to the config file.              [string]
  --extends               Override extends configurations (defaults or config
                          file settings).                                [array]
```

### How to limit issues shown in the output

This option lets you limit the number of detected issues (errors and warnings) shown in the output. If issues go over the threshold, the overflow is hidden in a spoiler.

```bash Command
redocly lint --max-problems 125
redocly lint mydefinition.yaml --max-problems 125
```

```bash Output
...
< ... 2 more problems hidden > increase with `--max-problems N`
```

### How to skip a rule or preprocessor during linting

You can use `--skip-rule` to ignore any [custom rules](./resources/custom-rules.md) or [built-in rules](./resources/built-in-rules.md). In this example, we will skip the `spec` and `operation-4xx-response` built-in rules:

```bash
redocly lint openapi.yaml --skip-rule=spec --skip-rule=operation-4xx-response
```

> Want to know how to skip a preprocessor? Because we don't recommend using preprocessors, you'll understand why we're choosing to skip that advice.

Reviewer: suggestion: This is clever :smile: but I think we'll be better off not mentioning preprocessors at all. The only information we're giving the user here is that we don't recommend preprocessors. We don't say why, or what will happen if they use (or skip) them, or anything else of value. I'd suggest removing "preprocessor" from the heading and just make this section about skipping rules. Then you don't need this outro anymore.

openapi lint --version
```

Each option is discussed in detail below, and examples are also provided.

## How to run the `lint` command

> In your terminal, cd to the root of your project directory, then type the command along with any of the options described below.

Reviewer: issue: This seems out of order, or just confusing - options are listed above this section? But they're described below...and they're not described all in one place? Also, this section doesn't deliver on its title. It doesn't show how to run the command...

Reviewer: suggestion: I think we should reconsider this new page structure. I'm totally OK with more specific, actionable headings for usage examples. But I think we're making the page confusing if we remove the whole list/table of all supported options. It's important for users to be able to see all supported options in one place. The "old" table was doing a good job of briefly describing each option and then linking to a specific section on how to use the option - maybe we can build on that and make it better?

Reviewer 2: I think the table is very important.

Same with having consistent page structures. (comment above about: Introduction - Usage - Options - Examples)

Author: I will reverse-engineer as discussed. Hopefully the second offering will be better.
